Ensuring Compatibility with Ethereum’s Pectra Upgrade (#70)
lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals: LIPS/lip-27.md

      - [Deposit Mechanism Migration](#deposit-mechanism-migration-1)
      - [Withdrawals Processing Time Prediction](#withdrawals-processing-time-prediction-1)
      - [The Correlated Penalty](#the-correlated-penalty)
      - [Churn Limit](#churn-limit)
      - [Attestation Containers Changes](#attestation-containers-changes)
      - [Constants and Helper Functions](#constants-and-helper-functions)
  - [2. Updates to Oracle Report Sanity Checker Parameters](#2-updates-to-oracle-report-sanity-checker-parameters)
    - [Overview](#overview-1)
    - [Rationale](#rationale-1)
    - [Technical Specification](#technical-specification-1)
  - [3. Updates to CS Verifier Contract](#3-updates-to-cs-verifier-contract)
    - [Overview](#overview-2)
    - [Rationale](#rationale-2)
      - [Remove Initial Slashing Penalty Report](#remove-initial-slashing-penalty-report)
      - [Update gIndexes](#update-gindexes)
    - [Technical Specification](#technical-specification-2)
      - [Remove Initial Slashing Penalty Report](#remove-initial-slashing-penalty-report-1)
      - [Update gIndexes](#update-gindexes-1)
- [Links](#links)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

## Simple Summary

> This proposal outlines changes to the Lido protocol to ensure continuous operation with Ethereum’s upcoming Pectra hardfork, focusing exclusively on compatibility rather than integrating any new features introduced by Pectra.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal outlines changes to the Lido protocol to ensure continuous operation with Ethereum’s upcoming Pectra hardfork, focusing exclusively on compatibility rather than integrating any new features introduced by Pectra; Pectra-related new functionality (such as Triggerable Withdrawals via EIP-7002 and MAX_EB Changes & validator consolidations via EIP-7251 will be addressed in separate LIPs).
```

Author: I think it's right to give such clarifications on the forum to respond to community expectations, but I think it's unnecessary for LIP. I'd prefer to keep here things only related directly to the specific proposal

## Abstract

For the off-chain components of the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles, it is proposed to:

- Implement the switch to the new report collection algorithm at the time of the hardfork activation;
- Account for Eth1 bridge deposits in the `pending_deposits` queue at the time of the hardfork activation;
- Update the sweep cycle length calculation algorithm in the Validator Exit Bus Oracle;
- Update the calculation of the correlated penalty size in the Accounting Oracle;
- Update the churn limit calculation in the Validator Exit Bus Oracle;
- Support the new format of attestation containers in the CSM Oracle;
- Update constants and helper functions in the oracles.

For the Oracle Report Sanity Checker, it is proposed to update the following parameters:

- `exitedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `9000` to `3600`;
- `appearedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `43200` to `1800`;
- `initialSlashingAmountPWei`: from `1000` to `8`.

For the CS Verifier contract, it is proposed to:

> - Remove the processing of slashing proofs;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove the processing of slashing proofs, as initial penalties are now negligible and rely only on the final slashing penalty;
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, but I'd prefer to keep it as it is. The LIP guidelines assume that in this section we are only answering the _what_ question, not the _why_ question:

> A short (~200 word) description of the proposed change, the abstract should clearly describe the proposed change. This is what *will* be done if the LIP is implemented, not *why* it should be done or *how* it will be done. If the LIP proposes deploying a new contract, write, "we propose to deploy a new contract that will do x".

https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/blob/develop/lip-X.md#abstract

##### Withdrawals Processing Time Prediction

[EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) introduces changes to the [withdrawals processing mechanism](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#modified-get_expected_withdrawals) in the Ethereum protocol. The changes affect the algorithm in the Validator Exit Bus Oracle for predicting the time required for a validator to become fully withdrawn after reaching the `withdrawable_epoch`.

_It is proposed to update the algorithm for predicting the time required for a validator to become fully withdrawn, reflecting the processing of `pending_partial_withdrawals` added in [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251)_.

The following assumptions are made:

> - The time required for a validator to become fully withdrawn after reaching the `withdrawable_epoch` is, on average, equal to half the time required to process all validators in a sweep cycle;

Reviewer: We've updated withdrawals API to be more accurate https://github.com/lidofinance/withdrawals-api/blob/develop/how-estimation-works.md . What's the relative cost to have this added here instead of this strong assumption?

In general, an accurate withdrawal timing estimation could be VERY useful to change selection of which indices to exit in the future, in order to drive down avg withdrawal time

Author: We left the existing assumptions in place only by adjusting the algorithm according to the changes in the specification.

I agree that we can improve the prediction. And moreover it seems to me that it is right to do it together with reviewing existing predicates and adding new to the sorting that would be responsible for the weight of the validator depending on how fast it can be completely withdrawn.

Since now the main parameter affecting the exit priority is a total amount of stake on an operator, which is quite sensitive (operators with 100 and 101 validators have different priorities), we need to first solve the problem of organizing operators into buckets.

Simplified, replace this:

```python
validators.sort(key=> lambda validator: validator.operator.total_active_validators)
```

to smth like this:

```python
validators.sort(key=> lambda validator: int(validator.operator.total_active_validators / 1000))
```

It may be a linear function or non-linear. I would prefer a power function so that the operators differ the less the more stake they have.

For example: 
- [x / 1000](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=plot+floor%28x%2F1000%29%2C+x%3D0+to+10000). Buckets: 1-999, 1000-1999, ...
- [x ^ 1/4](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=plot+floor%28pow%28x%2C1%2F5%29%29%2C+x%3D0+to+10000). Buckets: 1-15, 16-80, 81-255, 256-624, 625-1295, 1296-2401, ...

After that we also need to tweak the sorting of validator within the operator, for example in the same way, by grouping validators by buckets according to their age.

And lastly we need to add a new predicate to the sorting depending on the position in the sweep loop. Predict the epoch from which we start counting – take into account the time to collect the report, operators' reaction time, exit queue (limit of 600 validators per report is 75 epochs of queue after Pectra, this should be considered too), minimum time to withdrawable_epoch, etc. And from this epoch onwards validators have less and less weight in sorting.

This is how I can see it and this would also require a change in exit policy. I hope we can implement such logic in the next Oracle v6 release.

Reviewer: > Since now the main parameter affecting the exit priority is a total amount of stake on an operator, which is quite sensitive (operators with 100 and 101 validators have different priorities), we need to first solve the problem of organizing operators into buckets.

Yes this makes a lot of sense. 

> After that we also need to tweak the sorting of validator within the operator, for example in the same way, by grouping validators by buckets according to their age.

I think we will need additional sorting predicates (perhaps some method whereby modules "register" exit priority classifications for operators/validators contained therein (e.g. maybe we don't compare operators across all modules, but have a "multiplier" for some modules that takes into account some sort of risk-factor variable, and also to consider NO participation across modules explicitly somehow).

- Blocks are not missed, so each slot has a block with a payload;
- All `pending_partial_withdrawals` have reached the `withdrawable_epoch` and do not have any processing delays;
- All `pending_partial_withdrawals` are executed before full and partial withdrawals, and the result is immediately reflected in the validators' balances;

> - The limit `MAX_VALIDATORS_PER_WITHDRAWALS_SWEEP` is never reached.

Reviewer: Why do we assume this?

Author: **1) Napkin math**
total validators: 1761663
active validators: 1060328

Let's say that after the Pectra, everyone consolidates and only half of them are withdrawable in one cycle. We have:
total validators: 1761663
active validators: 16568
withdrawable validators: 8284 = 16568 / 2

With a normal distribution, the probability that fewer than 16 validators (`MAX_WITHDRAWALS_PER_PAYLOAD`) will be active among an arbitrary 16384 validators (`MAX_VALIDATORS_PER_WITHDRAWALS_SWEEP`) in a row is extremely unlikely https://chatgpt.com/share/e/6797bf68-77b8-800a-a185-bea3fb271d93

**2) Historical data**
Only 35 blocks in history with withdrawals < 16 and all of them occurred within ~3 months of Capella activation
https://dune.com/queries/4444377/7438503

Author: We already have this assumption in the current version but it's not documented. Not sure about LIP but we will add this to the docs

Author: Prepared a short math research in hackmd and added a link to it: https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/pull/70/commits/ae61110488787f569eb0e4d98656834d14373f5d. And I asked Max to double-check it

> These assumptions simplify the implementation and ensure that the algorithm remains efficient and straightforward. Although these assumptions may not always hold true in every scenario, they provide a reasonable approximation for the average case.

Reviewer: One can argue that over a long enough time frame if you expect the withdrawal time of a validator to be the midpoint of the time between time_of_exit and max_sweep_time then this might be true but only for something like a very well distributed set of keys, but in reality I have a feeling our key distribution doens't look like this. We may be able to backtest against historical data to see how big the impact has been currently. As the sweep time gets longer and longer, a realized deviation from this average means that the realized withdrawal times might vary significantly. If we expect total stake on ethereum to grow, we can try to make the algorithm more accurate IMO.

Author: I agree that the algorithm can be improved and described my thoughts above. I think it should be postponed until the next version of the oracle since this release is only intended as a reaction to the Pectra HF.

> I have a feeling our key distribution doens't look like this

I created a simple dune request to visualize the distribution of our validators: https://dune.com/queries/4629443/7711166

Reviewer: Love the vis! Bonus points if we do an animated one one "over time" =D

  """
  return sum(
    deposit.amount for deposit in state.pending_deposits
    if (
      # Is for the validator
      deposit.pubkey == validator.pubkey and
      # Is deposit request
      deposit.slot > GENESIS_SLOT
    )
  )
```

##### Withdrawals Processing Time Prediction

It is proposed to change the logic for predicting the time required for a validator to become fully withdrawn after reaching the `withdrawable_epoch`, reflecting the processing of `pending_partial_withdrawals` added in [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251).

```python
def predict_average_withdrawal_delay_in_epochs(state: BeaconState) -> int:
  """
  This method predicts the average withdrawal delay in epochs.
  It is assumed that on average, a validator sweep is achieved in half the time of a full sweep cycle.
  """

  withdrawals_number_in_sweep_cycle = predict_withdrawals_number_in_sweep_cycle(state)
  full_sweep_cycle_in_epochs = withdrawals_number_in_sweep_cycle / MAX_WITHDRAWALS_PER_PAYLOAD / SLOTS_PER_EPOCH

  return full_sweep_cycle_in_epochs // 2
```

```python
def predict_withdrawals_number_in_sweep_cycle(state: BeaconState) -> int:
  """

>   This method predicts the number of withdrawals that can be performed in a single sweep cycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This method predicts the number of withdrawals that can be performed in a next sweep cycle.
```

Author: fixed

    - [Overview](#overview-1)
    - [Rationale](#rationale-1)
    - [Technical Specification](#technical-specification-1)
  - [3. Updates to CS Verifier Contract](#3-updates-to-cs-verifier-contract)
    - [Overview](#overview-2)
    - [Rationale](#rationale-2)
      - [Remove Initial Slashing Penalty Report](#remove-initial-slashing-penalty-report)
      - [Update gIndexes](#update-gindexes)
    - [Technical Specification](#technical-specification-2)
      - [Remove Initial Slashing Penalty Report](#remove-initial-slashing-penalty-report-1)
      - [Update gIndexes](#update-gindexes-1)
- [Links](#links)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

## Simple Summary

This proposal outlines changes to the Lido protocol to ensure continuous operation with Ethereum’s upcoming Pectra hardfork, focusing exclusively on compatibility rather than integrating any new features introduced by Pectra.

## Abstract

For the off-chain components of the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles, it is proposed to:

- Implement the switch to the new report collection algorithm at the time of the hardfork activation;

> - Account for Eth1 bridge deposits in the `pending_deposits` queue at the time of the hardfork activation;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Account for Eth1 bridge deposits in the `pending_deposits` queue at the transition time after hardfork;
```

Author: fixed

For the Oracle Report Sanity Checker, it is proposed to update the following parameters:

- `exitedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `9000` to `3600`;
- `appearedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `43200` to `1800`;
- `initialSlashingAmountPWei`: from `1000` to `8`.

For the CS Verifier contract, it is proposed to:

- Remove the processing of slashing proofs;
- Redeploy the contract with the Electra activation slot and two sets of gIndexes for Deneb and Electra.

## Motivation

The Pectra upgrade introduces changes to the Ethereum protocol specifications that directly impact components of the Lido protocol. Specifically, these changes affect the algorithms of the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles, the limits in the Oracle Report Sanity Checker contract, the slashing penalty, and the gIndexes in the CS Verifier contract. To ensure the Lido protocol continues to operate accurately and reliably, the affected oracle algorithms, Oracle Report Sanity Checker limits, and the CS Verifier must be reviewed and updated in accordance with the new Ethereum protocol specifications.

## Specification

### 1. Updates to Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM Oracles

#### Overview

> New versions of the off-chain oracles are proposed, featuring updated algorithms for the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles to ensure compatibility with changes introduced by the Pectra hardfork. To minimize disruption, the implementation will include both the current and the updated algorithms, with the latter activated after the Pectra hardfork goes live on the network.

Reviewer 2: We are no minimizing disruption, but trying to avoid any

Author: fixed

> New versions of the off-chain oracles are proposed, featuring updated algorithms for the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles to ensure compatibility with changes introduced by the Pectra hardfork. To minimize disruption, the implementation will include both the current and the updated algorithms, with the latter activated after the Pectra hardfork goes live on the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New versions of the off-chain oracles are proposed, featuring updated algorithms for the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles to ensure compatibility with changes introduced by the Pectra hardfork. To minimize disruption, the implementation will include both the current and the updated algorithms, with the later activated after the Pectra hardfork goes live on the network.
```

##### Bunker Mode and The Correlated Penalty

[EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) introduces changes in the [initial slashing penalty](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#rewards-and-penalties) and in the [correlated penalty computation](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3882). These changes affect the activation conditions of [Bunker mode](https://docs.lido.fi/guides/oracle-spec/accounting-oracle#bunker-mode), a special mode in the [Withdrawals Queue](https://docs.lido.fi/guides/lido-tokens-integration-guide#withdrawals-unsteth) that provides protection for users who are withdrawing during rare but potentially adverse network conditions, such as mass slashing.

- It is proposed to update the calculation of the correlated penalty in accordance with the changes in the [`process_slashings`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#modified-process_slashings) method in the Ethereum specification. The new calculation algorithm will be activated for reports with a reference slot >= the hardfork activation slot.

> - It is proposed to leave the Bunker mode activation checks and configurable parameters unchanged. [The analytical research](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10NrRHPOXEjP1gZ78XQ6MP09k57SljmsdbAqkZSKAAuw/edit?usp=sharing) shows that although the network conditions triggering Bunker mode activation change significantly, the principle of checks based on measuring the rebase on the consensus layer remains relevant.

Reviewer: I think this link to analytical research is private. We should post it on the forums and link that.

Author: Thanks! Asked Max to share this link, now it's public

##### Identifying Stuck Validators

> [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) introduces a new condition to the [voluntary exit processing](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#modified-process_voluntary_exit) requests. A validator’s voluntary exit request will be rejected as long as there are pending partial withdrawals for that validator in the queue.

Reviewer: How does this work exactly? Doesn't a validator which is at balance >= MAX_EB always have a pending partial withdrawal in the queue? Does it maybe mean partial withdrawal in the sense of an EL-triggered partial withdrawal for any balance (well, up to the amt that would leave at least the minimum allowable EB on the validators), but not for the "automated skimming" partials?

Author: > Doesn't a validator which is at balance >= MAX_EB always have a pending partial withdrawal in the queue?

They don't have a separate queue, they are processed in a sweep loop

> How does this work exactly?

`pending_partial_withdrawals` only contain partial (no full) withdrawals initiated by EL triggered withdrawal requests. And since partial withdrawals could be done only for validators with 0x02 WCs type and we are not affected as long as we support only 0x01

> Does it maybe mean partial withdrawal in the sense of an EL-triggered partial withdrawal for any balance (well, up to the amt that would leave at least the minimum allowable EB on the validators), but not for the "automated skimming" partials?

Yes, the "automated skimming" withdrawal just loops through all the validators. `pending_partial_withdrawals` is a separate queue for EL initiated partials only. Though the processing of both occurs in the same place and the result of the processing is a `Withdrawal` operation in a block

Nevertheless, _it is proposed not to change the algorithm for identifying stuck validators_. Partial withdrawals from a validator’s balance can only be initiated from the execution address of the withdrawal credentials and only for validators with [new withdrawal credentials prefix `0x02`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#withdrawal-prefixes). The proposed protocol update does not include an update to the withdrawal vault contract to support partial withdrawals and does not include support for the required withdrawal credentials prefix `0x02`.

This condition should be considered in future protocol releases that include support for the new withdrawal credentials type and partial withdrawals.

#### Technical Specification

This section describes the technical details of implementing changes in the oracles. Some changes straightforward and strictly adhere to the Ethereum specification, while the rationale for other chosen solutions is provided in the section above.

##### Electra Spec Activation

> It is proposed that the new consensus version bumped in the oracle contracts will signal the off-chain oracle instances to switch to the new algorithm considering the Electra spec activation. Before the hardfork, the algorithm collects the report using the former methods; after the hardfork, it uses the new methods. The algorithm should check the `ELECTRA_FORK_EPOCH` constant from a consensus layer node [`/eth/v1/config/spec`](https://ethereum.github.io/beacon-APIs/#/Config/getSpec) and switch logic if an oracle report reference slot is reached this epoch.

Reviewer: What happens if the frame period contains slots from both pre and post hardfork?

Author: Great question!

**AO**

The main data of the report is a snapshot at a specific block, so it doesn't matter whether the hardfork was activated shortly before or after the reference slot. There are two exceptions: the bunker mode and Eth1 bridge deposits shortly before Electra.

In the bunker, we look back within the current frame to determine the drop in rewards. Since it is calculated by the difference in the total balance of validators, changes in Electra do not affect us here. Also, in the bunker, we look into the future predicting the correlated penalty for already slashed validators, and here we must consider which algorithm to use for each epoch in the future (this is in the implementation, but I think it can be reflected in the LIP).

Eth1 deposits are described separately in the LIP.

**VEBO**

Here we rely most heavily on the spec due to predictions. But at the same time, we have quite a few simplifications in the algorithms. For example, we assume that operators withdraw validators instantly. According to the spec, as soon as a voluntary exit is processed, the validator is immediately assigned an exit epoch, and after the activation of Electra, they will not be recalculated. Therefore, we do not care about predicting the activation of the hardfork in the near frame for this scenario. The new algorithm will simply be used in the next report when Electra is activated. For other places in VEBO the situation is similar

**CSM perf oracle**

The situation is different for the CSM performance oracle, as it collects data over the frame and it matters what the spec was at any given time. But since the changes in Electra that affect the CSM oracle only affect the attestation containers, we simply taught the oracle to recognize them.

Author: Added a clarification about Electra activation checking in the Bunker mode https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/pull/70/commits/620fb7d019a0e8709d9fbd8cf378dd27346f451a

Reviewer: > only affect the attestation containers, we simply taught the oracle to recognize them.

This is partly my question. We say here that what matters is when "refslot" of a report is. So if refslot is after the HF slot, then "use new algo". But in case of CSM for example we should use both algos (old algo for "older format" slots, new algo for new ones), right? The previous for the slots during the previous hardfork, and the new algo for the slots after, or does it not work like that? Is there like like an expectation that clients implement a database "translation" for slot data between the hardforks so that old slots follow the new container format?

Author: > We say here that what matters is when "refslot" of a report is. So if refslot is after the HF slot, then "use new algo". But in case of CSM for example we should use both algos (old algo for "older format" slots, new algo for new ones), right?

I view it this way: at the moment of Electra activation, we start using a new algorithm that can handle both types of attestations. More precisely, the processing and accounting of attestations do not change; only the attestation container changes, that is, how we retrieve the necessary data from the client (see `is_eip7549_attestation` in LIP).

> But in case of CSM for example we should use both algos (old algo for "older format" slots, new algo for new ones), right? The previous for the slots during the previous hardfork, and the new algo for the slots after, or does it not work like that?

Perhaps we can think about it this way. I separate it a bit because in other scenarios we explicitly check for the activation of the hardfork to switch our calculation algorithms, but here we simply check the format in which we see the attestation and use the same algorithm to process these attestations.

> Is there like like an expectation that clients implement a database "translation" for slot data between the hardforks so that old slots follow the new container format?

No, translation is not possible, otherwise the block hashes would change and break the chain

#### Rationale

[EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) introduces changes to the [churn limit calculation](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#new-get_balance_churn_limit) and to the [initial slashing penalty size](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/electra/beacon-chain.md#rewards-and-penalties) in the Ethereum protocol. These changes provide an opportunity to reassess and reduce the limits in the Oracle Report Sanity Checker contract, thereby enhancing the security of the Lido protocol by reducing limits on the number of validators that can exit or appear in the network per day and reducing the limit on the reportable negative rebase of the protocol, which is counted with respect to `initialSlashingAmountPWe`.

#### Technical Specification

It is proposed to update the following parameters in the Oracle Report Sanity Checker contract:

> - `exitedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `9000` to `3600`;

Reviewer: What's the purpose of choosing to retain "validators" as the base metric here instead of "stake"? Just to keep current changes simple since it's known that LIP 27 doesn't add ability for Lido to have >32 MEV validators?

Author: Yeah, we're trying to keep the changes to a minimum here. To just change this to the amount of exited ETH would require changing the Oracle Report Sanity Checker, Lido, AO contracts and reauditing them. I think we should review these limits when (if?) we do `MAX_EB` support

The initial slashing penalty size is significant relative to the validator's deposited balance, so its report occurs as quickly as possible after the validator is slashed to compensate losses to stakers that were affected. In Pectra, the penalty value is significantly reduced and for a validator with an effective balance of 32 ETH becomes equal to 0.0078125 ETH (`validator.effective_balance // MIN_SLASHING_PENALTY_QUOTIENT_ELECTRA`). Thus, the immediate impact of the initial slashing penalty compared to other possible losses becomes much less significant, and compensation can be delayed similar to the inactivity penalty.

Thus, it's proposed to remove the initial slashing penalty report from the CS Verifier contract before Pectra hardfork activation. Accounting of losses for initial slashing will take place at the moment of reporting the full withdrawal of the validator.

> It is important to note that the proposed solution carries additional risk in the period between the contract upgrade and the hardfork activation. In the event of mass slashing in the module, compensation for the initial slashing penalty received by validators will be delayed until the validator's full withdrawal (at least [`EPOCHS_PER_SLASHINGS_VECTOR`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/phase0/beacon-chain.md#state-list-lengths) ~36 days). A catastrophic scenario, assuming the module reaches its limit and all validators in the module are slashed during the considered period, would lead to a temporary loss of 0.0625% of TVL (6,000 ETH out of 9,600,000 ETH TVL at the time of writing this LIP) until the corresponding amount of stETH shares is burned upon validators withdrawal.

Reviewer: This isn't fully accurate. The mass slashing does not have to be concentrated in the module, what matters is the amount of validators in the module affected (as a share of total stake in the module), given a general mass slashing event (as correlation slashing penalties apply purely in relation to total validators slashed in the "proximal" period), and ultimately the most catastrophic scenario isn't bounded by the number of validators /ETH in CSM but by both how many validators in CSM + how many validators outside CSM are also slashed.

I realize we probably can't do it in time for Pectra, but we should consider a mechanism for ad hoc slashing reports in case of correlated slashing occurrences to ensure that "temporary losses" are as short as possible.

Author: Here I am looking at the maximum possible impact in a worst case scenario as a result of the decision to remove report initial slashing for CSM before Pectra. I do not address slashing in other modules or other validators here, since the correlated penalty in CSM cannot be reported now, only initial slashing, so we do not change these conditions and they can be neglected in the considerations.

> we should consider a mechanism for ad hoc slashing reports in case of correlated slashing occurrences to ensure that "temporary losses" are as short as possible.

That's a good idea. I would even consider how we could decouple from specific events and count such things based on simple principles (e.g. validator balance) so that we don't have to change this at every CL spec update

Reviewer: > Here I am looking at the maximum possible impact in a worst case scenario as a result of the decision to remove report initial slashing for CSM before Pectra

Yes, understood, I think perhaps I've misunderstood something when we were discussing the new spec. Is initial splashing penalty fixed at this new "minimal" value, or does it have a floor at the minimal value and is then dynamic based on other validators proximally (earlier in this case) slashed?

Author: The size of the initial slashing is dynamic and depends on the validator's effective balance only (EB / 4096):
- for a validator with EB = 32 eth the penalty will be 0.0078125 eth
- for a validator with EB = 2048 eth the penalty will be 0.5 eth

Punishments for mass violations are applied in correlated penalty. The algorithm for correlated penalty size is also [slightly changed](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3882) and can now be less than 1 ETH but there have been no fundamental changes here. The chain waits at least 18 days to look at other slashings and assign an appropriate penalty.

```python
# 2% as it proposed in https://snapshot.org/#/s:lido-snapshot.eth/proposal/0x7cbd5e9cb95bda9581831daf8b0e72d1ad0b068d2cbd3bda2a2f6ae378464f26
max_module_share = 0.02

# https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/bellatrix/beacon-chain.md#updated-penalty-values
MIN_SLASHING_PENALTY_QUOTIENT_BELLATRIX = 32

validator_losses_ratio = 1 / MIN_SLASHING_PENALTY_QUOTIENT_BELLATRIX = 0.03125 # initial slashing penalty per 1 validator
protocol_max_losses_ratio = max_module_share * losses_portion_per_validator = 0.02 * 1 / 32 = 0.000625 # 0.0625 %
```

##### Update gIndexes

The Pectra hardfork introduces changes in the consensus layer state containers, resulting in updated gIndexes required for the Beacon proofs processing.

> The CS Verifier contract was initially designed with a mechanism to switch gIndexes during a hardfork. The contract stores two sets of gIndexes and a slot after which the second set should be used. It is proposed to redeploy the contract after the hardfork activation epoch is confirmed and replace the current contract with the new one through an on-chain vote.

Reviewer: This part is a little unclear. If we have a mechanism that allows for switching gIndexes during a hardfork, and Pectra results in updated gIndexes (which in theory the contract has a mechanism for), why do we need to redeploy it instead of just using the mechanism it already supports?

Author: This mechanism requires redeployment of the contract, since these constants are embedded into the contract code during the deployment and cannot be changed. I'll clarify in the LIP

Author: Added a clarification about the nature of gIndexes variables: https://github.com/lidofinance/lido-improvement-proposals/pull/70/commits/2185d16f8b2133716ab30962a86a89eec82c2edc

---
lip: 27
title: Ensuring Compatibility with Ethereum’s Pectra Upgrade

> status: Work in Progress

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
status: WIP
```

      - [Churn Limit](#churn-limit)
      - [Attestation Containers Changes](#attestation-containers-changes)
      - [Constants and Helper Functions](#constants-and-helper-functions)
  - [2. Updates to Oracle Report Sanity Checker Parameters](#2-updates-to-oracle-report-sanity-checker-parameters)
    - [Overview](#overview-1)
    - [Rationale](#rationale-1)
    - [Technical Specification](#technical-specification-1)
  - [3. Updates to CS Verifier Contract](#3-updates-to-cs-verifier-contract)
    - [Overview](#overview-2)
    - [Rationale](#rationale-2)
      - [Remove Initial Slashing Penalty Report](#remove-initial-slashing-penalty-report)
      - [Update gIndexes](#update-gindexes)
    - [Technical Specification](#technical-specification-2)
      - [Remove Initial Slashing Penalty Report](#remove-initial-slashing-penalty-report-1)
      - [Update gIndexes](#update-gindexes-1)
- [Links](#links)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

## Simple Summary

This proposal outlines changes to the Lido protocol to ensure continuous operation with Ethereum’s upcoming Pectra hardfork, focusing exclusively on compatibility rather than integrating any new features introduced by Pectra.

## Abstract

> For the off-chain components of the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles, it is proposed to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the off-chain components of the [Accounting](https://docs.lido.fi/contracts/accounting-oracle), [Validator Exit Bus](https://docs.lido.fi/contracts/validators-exit-bus-oracle), and [CSM performance](https://docs.lido.fi/staking-modules/csm/contracts/CSFeeOracle) oracles, it is proposed to:
```

- Implement the switch to the new report collection algorithm at the time of the hardfork activation;
- Account for Eth1 bridge deposits in the `pending_deposits` queue at the migration period after the hardfork activation;
- Update the sweep cycle length calculation algorithm in the Validator Exit Bus Oracle;
- Update the calculation of the correlated penalty size in the Accounting Oracle;
- Update the churn limit calculation in the Validator Exit Bus Oracle;
- Support the new format of attestation containers in the CSM Oracle;
- Update constants and helper functions in the oracles.

> For the Oracle Report Sanity Checker, it is proposed to update the following parameters:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the [Oracle Report Sanity Checker](https://docs.lido.fi/contracts/oracle-report-sanity-checker), it is proposed to update the following parameters:
```

- `exitedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `9000` to `3600`;
- `appearedValidatorsPerDayLimit`: from `43200` to `1800`;
- `initialSlashingAmountPWei`: from `1000` to `8`.

> For the CS Verifier contract, it is proposed to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the [CS Verifier](https://docs.lido.fi/staking-modules/csm/contracts/CSVerifier) contract, it is proposed to:
```

- Remove the processing of slashing proofs;
- Redeploy the contract with the Electra activation slot and two sets of gIndexes for Deneb and Electra.

## Motivation

> The Pectra upgrade introduces changes to the Ethereum protocol specifications that directly impact components of the Lido protocol. Specifically, these changes affect the algorithms of the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles, the limits in the Oracle Report Sanity Checker contract, the slashing penalty, and the gIndexes in the CS Verifier contract. To ensure the Lido protocol continues to operate accurately and reliably, the affected oracle algorithms, Oracle Report Sanity Checker limits, and the CS Verifier must be reviewed and updated in accordance with the new Ethereum protocol specifications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Pectra upgrade (EIP-7600)](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7600) introduces changes to the Ethereum protocol specifications that directly impact components of the Lido protocol. Specifically, these changes affect the algorithms of the Accounting, Validator Exit Bus, and CSM oracles, the limits in the Oracle Report Sanity Checker contract, the slashing penalty, and the gIndexes in the CS Verifier contract. To ensure the Lido protocol continues to operate accurately and reliably, the affected oracle algorithms, Oracle Report Sanity Checker limits, and the CS Verifier must be reviewed and updated in accordance with the new Ethereum protocol specifications.
```

  ETH1_FOLLOW_DISTANCE            : 8h

  section CL
  EPOCHS_PER_ETH1_VOTING_PERIOD   : 6.8h
  Validator added to the registry : milestone, m2
```

_After Pectra_, validators are added to the registry after passing through the `pending_deposits` queue and the finalization of the block with the deposit transaction.

```mermaid
---
config:
  gantt:
    useWidth: 640
    useMaxWidth: false
---
gantt
  title After Pectra: Deposit request processing
  dateFormat HH:mm
  axisFormat %
  todayMarker off
  tickInterval 12month

  section EL
  Deposit transaction             : milestone, m1, 00:00, 0m

  section CL
  Slot finalization               : after m1, 13m
  Pending deposit queue           : pd, after m1, 4h
  Validator added to the registry : milestone, m2
```

The new deposit processing mechanism changes the time ETH remains in a transient state within the Lido protocol from almost constant to dynamic, depending on the volume of ETH in the `pending_deposits` queue.

_It is proposed to keep the logic of reporting the balance on the consensus layer unchanged, except for the migration period, which is considered in the next section_.

##### Deposit Mechanism Migration

> [EIP-6110](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6110) introduces a new mechanism for processing deposits and [EIP-7251](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7251) introduces a new weight-based queue `pending_deposits` for the new deposit mechanism.

Reviewer 3: maybe it's a duplicate though
